( pounding drums )
( ethereal chorus )
( drum phrase repeats )
( woman vocalizing )
( drums return )
♪ ♪
ODYSSEUS:
Men are haunted
by the vastness of eternity.
And so we ask ourselves,
will our actions echo
across the centuries?
Will strangers hear our names
long after we're gone
and wonder who we were,
how bravely we fought,
how fiercely we loved?
( hoofbeats pounding )
( horse neighing )
♪ ♪
( man shouting command )
( man shouting )
♪ ♪
( whickering )
( horse sputtering )
( crows cawing )
Good day for the crows.
Remove your army
from my land.
I like your land.
I think we'll stay.
I like your soldiers, too.
They won't
fight for you.
That's what the Messenians said.
And the Arcadians.
And the Epeians.
Now...
they all fight for me.
You can't have the whole
world, Agamemnon.
( laughs )
It's too big,
even for you.
I don't want to watch
another massacre.
Let's settle this war
in the old manner.
Your best fighter
against my best.
And if my man wins?
We'll leave Thessaly for good.
( shouting ):
Boagrius!
( men cheering )
( cheering continues )
( shouting ):
Achilles!
( laughter )
Boagrius has this effect
on many heroes.
Careful who you insult,
old king.
My King?
Achilles is not with the army.
Where is he?!
I sent a boy to look for him.
( dog barks )
( gasps )
I was having
a good dream.
A very good dream.
King Agamemnon sent me.
He needs to dis...
I'll speak to your
king in the morning.
But, my lord,
it is morning.
They're waiting for you.
( exhales )
( grunts )
Are the stories
about you true?
They say your mother
is an immortal goddess.
They say you
can't be killed.
I wouldn't be bothering
with the shield then, would I?
The Thessalonian
you're fighting--
he's the biggest man
I've ever seen.
I wouldn't want to fight him.
That's why
no one will remember your name.
( men cheering )
MEN ( chanting ):
Achilles! Achilles! Achilles!
Achilles! Achilles!
Achilles! Achilles! Achilles...!
( grunts ):
Hmm.
Perhaps we should
have our war tomorrow
when you're
better rested.
I should have you whipped
for your impudence.
Perhaps you
should fight him.
Achilles.
Achilles?
Look at the men's faces.
You can save hundreds of them.
You can end this war
with a swing of your sword.
Let them go home
to their wives.
Imagine a king
who fights his own battles.
Wouldn't that be a sight?
Of all the warlords
loved by the gods,
I hate him the most.
( yelling )
( men cheering )
( grunts )
( loud groan )
( breathing rapidly )
( groans )
( grunts )
( men cheering and yelling )
MEN ( chanting ):
Achilles! Achilles!
Achilles! Achilles...!
Is there no one else?
Is there no one else?!
Who are you,
soldier?
Achilles.
Son of Peleus.
Achilles?
I'll remember the name.
The ruler of Thessaly
carries this scepter.
Give it to
your king.
He's not my king.
( indistinct shouts
and chatter )
MEN:
Brothers in arms!
MAN:
Friendship!
MEN:
( men cheering )
MAN:
Brothers in arms!
MEN:
MAN:
Friendship!
MEN:
( men cheering )
( indistinct chatter )
( banging on table )
Princes of Troy,
on our last night together,
Queen Helen
and I salute you.
( men cheering,
staffs banging on floor )
We've had our conflicts before,
it's true.
We fought many battles,
Sparta and Troy.
And fought well!
( cheering )
But I have always respected
your father.
Priam is a good king,
a good man.
I respected him
as an adversary,
I respect him
now as my ally.
( cheering )
Hector, Paris, young princes.
Come, stand.
Drink with me.
Let us drink to peace.
To peace.
Between Troy and Sparta.
( cheering )
May the gods keep the wolves
in the hills
and the women in our beds.
( cheering )
( lively music plays )
( laughs )
For the gods.
( laughter )
( indistinct chatter )
MAN:
Carry on.
( jewelry clattering )
( door creaking )
You shouldn't be here.
That's what you said last night.
Last night was a mistake.
And the night
before?
I've made many mistakes
this week.
( sighs )
Do you want me to go?
( cheering )
( low and indistinct chatter )
( men singing )
( chuckles and groans )
Pearls
from the Sea of Propontis.
They're beautiful.
But I can't wear them.
Menelaus would kill us both.
( soft gasp )
Don't be
afraid of him.
I'm not afraid of dying.
I'm afraid of tomorrow.
I-I'm afraid
of watching you sail away
and knowing
you'll never come back.
( sniffs )
Before you came to Sparta,
I was a ghost.
I walked, and I ate,
and I swam in the sea...
but I was just a ghost.
You don't have
to fear tomorrow.
Come with me.
Don't play with me.
Don't play.
If you come, we'll
never be safe.
Men will hunt us,
the gods will curse us.
But I'll love you.
( soft gasp )
Till the day
they burn my body,
I will love you.
♪ ♪
A beautiful morning.
Poseidon has blessed our voyage.
Sometimes the gods
bless you in the morning
and curse you
in the afternoon.
MAN:
Drop sail!
Do you love me, brother?
Would you protect me
against any enemy?
The last time you
spoke to me like this,
you were ten years old,
and you'd just stolen
father's horse.
What have you done now?
I must show you something.
♪ ♪
( gasps )
Where is she?
I swear by the
father of the gods,
I will gut you here
if you don't tell me!
MAN:
My King!
She left.
With the Trojans.
The fisherman here
saw her board their ship.
The Trojans?
With the young
prince, Paris. She....
Get my ship ready.
Turn us 'round.
Back to Sparta.
Higher on the sail!
Wait, wait.
You fool.
Listen to me--
Do you know what you've done?!
Do you know how many years
our father worked for peace?
I love her.
( groans )
It's all a game to you,
isn't it?
You roam from town to town
bedding merchant's wives
and temple mates.
And you think you know
something about love.
What about your father's love?
You spat on him when you
brought her on this ship!
What about the love
for your country?
You'd let Troy burn
for this woman?
( pants )
I won't let you
start a war for her.
May I speak?
What you say is true.
I've wronged you,
I've wronged our father.
If you want to take Helen
back to Sparta, so be it.
But I go with her.
To Sparta?
They'll kill you.
Then I'll die fighting.
Oh, and that sounds heroic
to you, doesn't it?
To die fighting?
Tell me, little brother,
have you ever killed a man?
No.
Ever seen a man die in combat?
I've killed men,
and I've heard them dying,
and I've watched them dying,
and there's nothing
glorious about it.
Nothing poetic.
You say you want
to die for love,
but you know nothing
about dying,
and you know nothing
about love!
All the same...
I go with her.
I won't ask you
to fight my war.
You already have.
To Troy!
About ship!
Set sail!
( indistinct chatter )
( doors creak and thud )
I want her back.
Well, of course you do.
She's a beautiful woman.
I want her back so I can kill
her with my own two hands.
And I won't rest till I've
burned Troy to the ground.
I thought you wanted
peace with Troy.
I should have listened to you.
Peace is for the women...
and the weak.
Empires are forged by war.
All my life I've stood by your
side, fought your enemies.
You're the elder,
you reap the glory.
This is the way of the world.
But have I ever complained,
brother?
Have I ever asked you
for anything?
Never.
You're a man of honor.
Will you go to war with me,
brother?
AGAMEMNON:
I always thought my brother's
wife was a foolish woman,
but she's proved
to be very useful.
( chuckles )
The Trojans have never been
conquered.
Some say they can't
be conquered.
Old King Priam
thinks he's untouchable
behind his high walls.
He thinks the sun god
will protect him.
But the gods protect only...
the strong!
If Troy falls...
I control...
the Aegean.
Hector commands
the finest army in the east.
I'll attack them
with the greatest force
the world has ever seen.
I want all the Kings of Greece
and their armies.
Send emissaries in the morning.
One last thing.
We need Achilles
and his Myrmidons.
( whispering ):
Achilles.
He can't be controlled.
He's as likely to fight us
as the Trojans.
We don't need to control him,
we need to unleash him.
That man was born to end lives.
Yes, he's a gifted killer.
But he threatens
everything I've built.
Before me, Greece was nothing.
I brought
all the Greek kingdoms together.
I created a nation
out of fire worshippers
and snake eaters!
I build the future, Nestor.
Me!
Achilles is the past.
A man who fights for no flag,
a man loyal to no country.
How many battles have we won
off the edge of his sword?
This'll be the greatest war
the world has ever seen.
We need the greatest warrior.
( sighs )
There's only one man
he'll listen to.
( clack of wooden swords )
Never hesitate.
( grunts )
Nervous?
Petrified.
( grunts )
You told me never
to change sword hands.
Yes. When you know
how to use it,
you won't be
taking my orders.
( men exclaim )
( chuckles )
Your reputation
for hospitality
is fast becoming legend.
( chuckles )
Patroclus, my cousin.
Odysseus, King of Ithaca.
Patroclus.
I knew your parents well.
I miss them.
Now you have this one
watching over you, eh?
Learning from Achilles
himself.
Kings would kill
for the honor.
Are you here
at Agamemnon's bidding?
We need to talk.
I will not fight for him.
I'm not asking you
to fight for him.
I'm asking you
to fight for the Greeks.
Why?
Are the Greeks tired
of fighting each other?
For now.
The Trojans
never harmed me.
They insulted Greece.
They insulted one Greek,
a man who couldn't
hold onto his wife.
What business is that of mine?
Your business is war,
my friend.
Is it?
The man has no honor.
Let Achilles fight for honor.
Let Agamemnon fight for power.
And let the gods decide
which man to glorify.
For the Greeks!
Forget Agamemnon.
Fight for me.
My wife will feel
much better if she knows
you're by my side.
I'll feel much better.
( grunts )
We're sending the largest fleet
that ever sailed.
A thousand ships.
PATROCLUS:
Prince Hector, is he
as good a warrior
as they say?
The best of all the Trojans.
Some say he's better
than all the Greeks, too.
Even if your cousin
doesn't come,
I hope you'll join us,
Patroclus.
We could use
a strong arm like yours.
Play your tricks on me,
but not my cousin.
You have your sword,
I have my tricks.
We play with the toys
the gods give us.
We sail for Troy in three days.
This war will never be
forgotten.
Nor will the heroes
who fight in it.
♪ ♪
( gentle splashing )
I knew they would come for you.
Long before you were born,
I knew they
would come.
They want you to fight in Troy.
I'm making you
another seashell necklace.
Like the ones I used to make you
when you were a boy.
Do you remember?
Mother...
tonight I decide.
If you stay in Larissa...
you will find peace.
You'll find a wonderful woman.
You will have sons
and daughters,
and they will have children.
And they will love you.
And when you are gone,
they will remember you.
But when your children are dead,
and their children after them...
your name will be lost.
If you go to Troy,
glory will be yours.
They will write stories
about your victories
for thousands of years.
The world
will remember your name.
But if you go to Troy...
you will never come home.
For your glory walks
hand-in-hand with your doom.
And I shall never
see you again.
♪ ♪
( men shouting )
( crowd cheering )
( cheering continues )
♪ ♪
( cheering )
( applause )
My son.
Father.
Paris.
Father...
this is Helen.
Helen?
Helen of Sparta?
Helen of Troy.
I've heard rumors
of your beauty.
For once,
the gossips were right.
Welcome.
Come, you must be tired.
Look.
( gasps )
He's grown.
He's strong.
PARIS:
Briseis!
Paris!
Beloved cousin, your beauty
grows with each new moon.
Briseis.
A servant of Apollo now.
The young men of Troy
were devastated
when Briseis chose
the virgin robes.
♪ ♪
HECTOR:
Father, I know this is
the last thing we need.
It is the will of the gods.
Everything is in their hands.
But I'm surprised you
let him bring her.
If I had let him
fight Menelaus for her,
you'd be burning
your son's body
instead of welcoming
a daughter.
We could send
peace envoys to Menelaus.
You know Menelaus.
He'd spear their heads
to his gate.
What would you have me do?
Put her on a ship
and send her home.
Women have always loved Paris,
and he has loved them back,
but this is different.
Something has changed in him.
If we send her home to Menelaus,
he will follow her.
This is my country,
and these are my countrymen.
I don't want to see them suffer
so my brother
can have his prize.
And it's not just the
Spartans coming after her.
By now, Menelaus
has gone to Agamemnon.
And Agamemnon has wanted
to destroy us for years.
Enemies have been attacking us
for centuries.
Our walls still stand.
Father, we can't win this war.
Apollo watches over us.
Even Agamemnon
is no match for the gods.
And how many battalions
does the sun god command?
Do not mock the gods.
HELEN:
They're coming for me.
The wind
is bringing them closer.
What if we left?
Tonight... right now.
What if we went
down to the stables,
took two horses and left?
Ride east, keep riding.
And go where?
Away from here.
I could hunt deer, rabbit.
I could feed us.
But this is your home.
You left your home for me.
Sparta was never my home.
My parents sent my there
when I was 16 to marry Menelaus.
But it was never my home.
We'll live
off the land.
No more palaces for us.
No more servants.
We don't need any of that.
And your family?
We'd be protecting my family.
If we're not here,
what need is there for war?
Menelaus won't give up.
He'll track us
to the end of the world.
He doesn't know these lands.
I do.
We can lose
ourselves in a day.
You don't know Menelaus.
You don't know
his brother.
They'll burn every house
in Troy to find us.
They'll never believe
we've left.
And even if they do,
they'll burn it for spite.
Then I'll make it easy
for him to find me.
I'll walk right up to him
and tell him you're mine.
You're very young, my love.
♪ ♪
( shouts and chatter )
( grunting )
♪ ♪
( chanting )
Look at that.
Hey?
( coos )
( gong rings )
( distant yells )
( baby cries )
( myriad fearful voices )
Take up your positions!
♪ ♪
( grunting )
My lord?
Should we wait
for the others?
They brought us here
for war, didn't they?
Yes, but Agamemnon's orders--
You fight for me,
Eudorus, or Agamemnon?
For you, my lord.
Then fight for me,
and let the servants
of Agamemnon fight for him.
Black sail.
It's Achilles.
AGAMEMNON:
What's the fool doing?
He's going to take the beach
of Troy with 50 men?
Make way there!
Make way!
( gong ringing distantly )
Tecton.
Is the Apollonian Guard ready?
Waiting at the city gates.
Good.
I'll be right there.
Lysander.
How long before
the army is ready?
Half of our men are still coming
in from the countryside.
We have to arm them,
we have to match them...
How long?
Noon.
Make it sooner.
( distant yell )
( rowers grunting )
Patroclus!
( man shouting,
rowers chanting )
Put down your spear.
But I'm fighting
the Trojans, cousin.
Not today.
But I'm ready.
You taught me how to fight.
And you're a good student.
But you're not
a Myrmidon yet.
Look at these men.
They are the fiercest
soldiers in all of Greece.
Each of them
has bled for me.
You will guard
the ship.
But this is a war!
Cousin, I
can't fight
the Trojans if I'm
concerned for you.
Guard the ship.
( grunts )
( shouting )
( horse neighing )
HECTOR:
Trojans!
All my life,
I've lived by a code.
And the code is simple--
honor the gods,
love your woman,
and defend your country.
( cheering )
Troy is mother to us all.
Fight for her!
( cheering )
( shouting )
♪ ♪
Myrmidons,
my brothers of the sword.
I'd rather fight beside you
than any army of thousands.
Let no man forget
how menacing we are.
We are lions!
( chanting )
Do you know what's there,
waiting, beyond that beach?
Immortality!
Take it!
It's yours!
( shouting )
( men grunting and chanting )
( man shouting )
( men grunting )
( grunting )
( man shouting )
Forward!
( grunting )
( yelling )
MAN:
Go!
( grunting )
( men shouting )
The man wants to die.
( grunting chant )
ACHILLES:
On my command!
( yelling )
Break off! Break off!
( men yelling )
( metal clanging )
( screaming, grunting )
( rowers chanting )
Look at him.
Look.
Row, you lazy
whores, row!
Greeks are dying!
Row!
( screams )
( grunts )
( grunts and screams )
( yelling )
( horse neighing )
( grunting )
Those men down there need help.
Now!
Tecton, with me.
( grunts )
Flank, Tecton!
( panting )
( grunts )
( grunting )
( men chanting )
Achilles! Achilles! Achilles...!
Achilles!
( men chanting )
( grunting )
( screaming )
( men cheering and chanting )
Back to the city!
The sun god is a patron of Troy,
our enemy.
Take whatever treasure
you can find.
( cheering )
EUDORUS:
With your permission, my lord.
Speak.
Apollo sees everything.
Perhaps... perhaps
it is not wise
to offend him.
( distant yells )
Warn the men.
Wait.
( yells )
( grunting )
( men yelling )
( yelling )
( men shouting )
ACHILLES:
You're very brave
or very stupid to
come after me alone.
You must be Hector.
Do you know who I am?
These priests weren't armed.
Fight me!
Why kill you now,
Prince of Troy,
with no one here
to see you fall?
Why did you come here?
They'll be talking
about this war
for a thousand years.
In a thousand years,
the dust from our bones
will be gone.
Yes, Prince.
But our names will remain.
( panting )
( sighs )
Go home, Prince.
Drink some wine,
make love to your wife.
Tomorrow, we'll have our war.
You speak of war
as if it's a game.
But how many wives wait
at Troy's gates
for husbands
they'll never see again?
Perhaps your brother
can comfort them.
I hear he's good
at charming other men's wives.
( blowing air through teeth )
My lord, you
let him go?
It's too early in the day
for killing princes.
♪ ♪
( cheering )
( chanting ):
Achilles, Achilles...
♪ ♪
Achilles.
Ajax.
You're as fearless
as the gods.
I'm honored to go
to war with you.
As am I.
If you sailed any slower,
the war would be over.
I don't mind missing the start
as long as I'm here at the end.
( laughs )
My lord.
I've got something
to show you.
The men found her
hiding in the temple.
They thought she'd, um...
( clears throat )
...amuse you.
What's your name?
Did you not hear me?
You killed Apollo's priests.
I've killed men
in five countries,
never a priest.
Well, then your men did.
The sun god will
have his vengeance.
What is he waiting for?
The right time to strike.
His priests are dead,
and his acolytes are captive.
I think your god
is afraid of me.
Afraid?
Apollo is master of the sun.
He fears nothing.
Then where is he?
And you're nothing but a killer!
You wouldn't know anything
about the gods.
( sighs )
I know more about the gods
than your priests.
I've seen them.
You're royalty, aren't you?
Spent years talking down to men.
( sniffs )
You must be royalty.
What's your name?
Even the servants
of Apollo have names.
Briseis.
Are you afraid,
Briseis?
Should I be?
My lord.
Agamemnon requests
your presence.
The kings are gathering
to celebrate the victory.
You fought well today.
My lord.
What do you want
here in Troy?
You didn't come for
the Spartan queen.
I want what all men want.
I just want it more.
You don't need
to fear me, girl.
You're the only Trojan
who can say that.
( goat bleating )
( man shouting )
You have won
a great victory,
my king of kings.
No one thought
the Trojan beach
could be captured
so easily.
A beautiful gift, Triopas.
You will be
among the first
to walk in the streets
of Troy tomorrow.
My father, Naleus,
had this urn made
to commemorate his victory
at Cyparisseis.
I present it to you
in honor of an even
more memorable victory.
AGAMEMNON:
Thank you, old friend.
Tomorrow, we'll eat supper
in the gardens of Troy.
Leave us.
War is young men dying,
and old men talking.
You know this.
Ignore the politics.
Apparently,
you won some great victory.
Ah, perhaps you didn't notice.
The Trojan beach belonged
to Priam in the morning.
It belongs to Agamemnon
in the afternoon.
You can have the beach.
I didn't come here for sand.
No, you came here
because you want your name
to last through
the ages.
A great victory was won today.
But that victory
is not yours.
Kings did not kneel
to Achilles.
Kings did not
pay homage to Achilles.
Perhaps the kings were too far
behind to see.
The soldiers won the battle.
History remembers
kings, not soldiers!
Tomorrow, we'll batter
down the gates of Troy.
I'll build monuments
to victory
on every island
of Greece.
I'll carve Agamemnon
in the stone.
Be careful,
king of kings.
First, you need the victory.
Your men sacked
the temple of Apollo, yes?
You want gold, take it.
It's my gift
to honor your courage.
Take what you wish.
I already have.
Aphareus!
Haemon!
( Briseis grunting )
( grunting )
( sniffling )
The spoils of war.
I have no argument with you,
brothers,
but if you don't release her,
you'll never see home again.
Decide.
Guards!
( blades clang )
Stop!
Too many men have died today.
If killing is your only talent,
that's your curse.
I don't want anyone
dying for me.
AGAMEMNON:
Mighty Achilles,
silenced by a slave girl.
Tonight...
I'll have her
give me a bath.
And then...
who knows?
You sack of wine!
Before my time is done,
I will look down
on your corpse and smile.
( indistinct shouting )
( waves crashing )
If they want a war,
we will give them a war.
( crowd murmuring )
I would match
the best of Troy
against the best
of Greece any day.
The best of Greece outnumber
the best of Troy two to one.
( murmuring )
Glaucus...
you have fought with me
for 40 years.
Can we win this war?
Our walls have never
been breached.
We have the finest
archers in the world.
And we have Hector.
Yes...
we can win.
( clapping and cheering )
I spoke to two farmers today.
They saw an eagle
flying with a serpent
clutched in its talons.
This is a sign from Apollo.
We will win a great victory
tomorrow.
Bird signs.
You want to plan a strategy
based on bird signs.
PRIAM:
Hector, show respect.
A high priest is
a servant of the gods.
And I am a servant of Troy.
I've always honored the gods,
Father, you know that.
But today I fought
a Greek who desecrated
the statue of Apollo.
Apollo didn't strike
the man down.
The gods won't fight
this war for us.
There won't be a war.
( crowd murmurs )
This is not a conflict
of nations.
It is a dispute between two men.
And I don't want to see another
Trojan die because of me.
Paris!
Tomorrow morning,
I will challenge Menelaus
for the right to Helen.
The winner will
take her home.
The loser will burn
before nightfall.
♪ ♪
PARIS:
Father...
I'm sorry for the pain
I've caused you.
Do you love her?
You are a great king
because you love
your country so much.
Every blade of grass.
Every grain of sand.
Every rock in the river.
You love all of Troy.
That is the way
I love Helen.
PRIAM:
I've fought many wars
in my time.
Some were fought for land,
some for power,
some for glory.
I suppose fighting for love
makes more sense
than all the rest,
but I won't be
the one fighting.
The sword of Troy.
My father carried this sword,
and his father before him,
all the way back
to the founding of Troy.
The history of our people
was written with this sword.
Carry it with you tomorrow.
The spirit of Troy
is in that sword.
So long as a Trojan
carries it,
our people have
a future.
The man who killed Tecton
outside Apollo's temple--
I've never seen a spear
thrown like that.
An impossible throw.
Don't go tomorrow.
Please don't go.
Paris fights tomorrow, not me.
50,000 Greeks
didn't cross the sea
to watch your brother fight.
You know this.
You'd make a fine general,
my love.
You've been fighting
your whole life.
Let other men do
battle this time.
You know I don't want to fight.
I want to see my son
grow tall.
I want to see the girls
chasing after him.
I can't lose you.
I won't survive.
( crying )
♪ ♪
I must see Paris.
Wait.
Wait!
Helen... what
are you doing?
Let me go.
No.
( crying )
( sighs )
I saw them burn.
( sniffles )
I saw them burning on the pyres.
That's my fault.
It is.
You know it is.
All those widows.
I still hear them screaming.
Their husbands died
because I'm here.
I'm going down to the ships.
No, you're not.
I'm giving myself
back to Menelaus.
It's too late for that.
Do you think Agamemnon cares
about his brother's marriage?
This is about power,
not love.
Paris is going to fight
in the morning?
Yes.
Menelaus will kill him.
I won't let that happen.
It's his decision.
No.
I can't ask anyone
to fight for me.
I'm no longer
queen of Sparta.
You're a princess
of Troy now...
and my brother
needs you tonight.
( indistinct chatter )
My lord.
My lord, the army
is marching.
Let them march.
We stay.
But the men are ready.
We stay till Agamemnon groans
to have Achilles back.
As you wish.
Are you ready to fight?
Are you ready to kill?
To take life?
I am.
At night, I see their faces,
all the men I've killed.
They're standing there on
the far bank of the River Styx.
They're waiting for me.
They say, "Welcome, brother."
We men are wretched things.
I taught you how to fight,
but I never taught you
why to fight.
I fight for you.
Who will you fight for
when I'm gone?
Soldiers, they fight for kings
they've never even met.
They do what
they're told;
they die when
they're told to die.
Soldiers obey.
Don't waste your life
following some fool's orders.
Go.
♪ ♪
( man shouts )
( men shouting )
♪ ♪
( horses galloping )
( men shouting in distance )
♪ ♪
( horse neighs in distance )
( Helen gasps softly )
( barely audible shouts
in distance )
Are you sure
you want to do this?
I started this war.
Helen.
Sit with me.
( horse neighs )
( ground rumbling )
( man shouting )
( man shouts )
♪ ♪
( horse neighs )
( exhales )
♪ ♪
( man shouts )
Prepare to halt!
Halt!
( horse neighs )
Move.
( crow cawing in distance )
I see you're not hiding
behind your high walls.
Valiant of you.
Ill-advised, but valiant.
You come here uninvited.
Go back to your ships
and go home.
We've come too far,
Prince Hector.
Prince? What prince?
What son of a king would accept
a man's hospitality,
eat his food,
drink his wine,
embrace him in friendship,
and then steal his wife
in the middle of the night?
The sun was shining
when your wife left you.
She's up there watching,
isn't she? Good.
I want her to watch you die.
AGAMEMNON:
Not yet,
brother.
Look around you, Hector.
I brought all the warriors
of Greece to your shores.
You can still save
Troy, young prince.
I have two wishes.
If you grant them, no more
of your people need die.
First, you must give Helen back
to my brother.
Second, Troy must submit
to my command
to fight for me
whenever I call.
You want me to look upon
your army and tremble?
Well, I see them.
I see 50,000 men brought here
to fight for one man's greed.
Careful, boy.
My mercy has limits.
And I've seen the limits
of your mercy.
And I tell you now,
no son of Troy
will ever submit
to a foreign ruler.
Then every son of Troy
shall die.
There is another way.
I love Helen.
I won't give her up
and neither will you.
So let us fight
our own battle.
The winner takes Helen home.
And let that be the end of it.
A brave offer,
but not enough.
Let me kill this
little peacock.
I didn't come here
for your pretty wife.
I came here for Troy.
And I came for my honor.
His every breath insults me.
Let me kill him.
When he's lying in the dust,
give the signal to attack.
You'll have your city.
I'll have my revenge.
So be it.
I accept your challenge,
and tonight
I'll drink to your bones.
MAN:
My lord.
AGAMEMNON:
Back to the line!
( men shout )
( sword clangs )
Make him swing and miss--
he'll tire.
Brother...
if I fall...
tell Helen, tell her...
I will.
Don't let Menelaus
hurt her. If he...
You think of your sword
and his sword
and nothing else.
( crows cawing in distance )
( sword clangs )
( sighs )
( chuckles )
( grunting )
( panting )
( grunts )
Get up.
Come on.
( laughs )
( laughing )
( blow lands, Paris grunts )
( swords clang )
( panting )
( laughing )
( groans in pain )
( low growl )
( swords clanging )
( gasping and groaning )
See the crows?
They never tasted
prince before.
( crows cawing in distance )
( grunts )
( low growl )
Is this...
what you left me for?!
Fight!
Fight me!
( Paris gasping )
You coward!
Fight me!
We have a pact!
Fight!
Fight him, son...
MENELAUS:
Coward!
...fight him.
MENELAUS:
Fight me!
The Trojans have violated
the agreement!
Fight!
Prepare for battle!
This is not honor!
This is not worthy of royalty!
If he doesn't fight,
Troy is doomed.
The fight is over.
The fight is not over.
Stand back, Prince Hector.
I'll kill him
at your feet.
I don't care!
He's my brother.
( panting )
( Menelaus yells )
( groans )
( grunts )
( groans weakly )
♪ ♪
( yells )
( all yelling )
( grunts )
Paris!
Go. Go.
Get inside, Paris!
Archers!
Our men are too close
to the walls.
Pull back, you fool!
For Troy!
ALL:
( shouting )
Now!
Loose!
( yelling and grunting )
♪ ♪
Get them in line!
Get the men back into lines!
Front line, push!
( grunts )
( yelling )
( yelling and groaning )
( groaning )
( yelling )
( grunting )
( yelling and grunting )
( Trojan soldiers cheering )
Forward. Forward!
( shouting )
( yelling )
Forward!
( grunting )
Apollonians!
( yelling )
( grunts )
Prince Hector!
Keep going!
We need to retreat!
AGAMEMNON:
My army has never
lost a battle yet!
You won't have an army
if you don't fall back!
Back to the ships!
Retreat!
Back! Go back!
( cheering )
Get back!
Get back to the ships!
( yelling )
( horses neighing )
( shouting )
♪ ♪
Fall back!
Men, fall back! Halt!
Go back!
Halt!
But, my prince,
we have them on the run!
We're in range of their archers.
Have our men
gather our fallen.
Send an emissary to the Greeks.
Tell them they can collect
their dead.
Would they have done
the same for us?
Go!
Back!
LYSANDER:
Fall back into line!
♪ ♪
( gasps )
You think I'm a coward.
I am a coward.
I knew he would kill me.
You were watching.
My father...
my brother...
all of Troy.
Shame didn't matter.
I gave up my pride...
my honor...
...just to live.
For love.
You challenged
a great warrior.
That took courage.
I betrayed you.
Menelaus was a brave man.
He lived for fighting.
And every day
I was with him,
I wanted to walk into
the sea and drown.
I don't want a hero,
my love.
I want a man I
can grow old with.
They're laughing at me in Troy.
Drunk with victory!
They think I'll sail home
at first light.
Maybe we should.
Flee? Like a whipped dog?
The men believe we came here
for Menelaus's wife.
He won't be needing her anymore.
My brother's blood still wets
the sand, and you insult him!
It's no insult to say
a dead man is dead.
NESTOR:
If we leave now,
we lose all credibility.
If the Trojans can
beat us so easily,
how long before
the Hittites invade?
If we stay, we stay here
for the right reasons--
to protect Greece,
not your pride.
Your private battle with
Achilles is destroying us.
Achilles is one man.
Hector is one man.
Look what he did to us today.
Hector fights for his country!
Achilles fights only
for himself!
I don't care about
the man's allegiance,
I care about his ability
to win battles.
NESTOR:
He's right.
The men's morale is weak.
Well, even if I could make peace
with Achilles,
the man won't listen to me!
He's as likely to spear me
as to speak to me!
I'll talk to him.
He'll want the girl back.
He can have the damn girl.
I haven't touched her.
Where is she?
I gave her to the men.
They need some amusement
after today.
( soldiers laughing )
Come on, give the bitch to me!
Hey, who's first?
Here!
HAEMON:
Trojan whore!
What's this,
a virgin's robe?
You won't be needing that
for much longer!
Hold her!
Better to be a Spartan slave
than a Trojan...
Achilles!
( yells )
♪ ♪
( Briseis softly crying )
Are you hurt?
I watched you fight them,
you have courage.
To fight back
when people attack me--
dog has that kind of courage.
( splashing )
Eat.
I've known men like you
my whole life.
No, you haven't.
You think you're so different
from a thousand others?
Soldiers understand nothing
but war.
Peace confuses them.
And you hate these soldiers.
I pity them.
Trojan soldiers died
trying to protect you.
Perhaps they deserve
more than your pity.
Why did you choose this life?
What life?
To be a great warrior.
I chose nothing.
I was born, and
this is what I am.
And you? Why did you
choose to love a god?
I think you'll find
the romance one-sided.
Do you enjoy provoking me?
You've dedicated your life
to the gods--
Zeus, god of thunder,
Athena, goddess of wisdom.
You serve them.
Yes, of course.
And Aries,
god of war,
who blankets his bed
with the skin
of men he's killed?
All the gods are to be feared
and respected.
I'll tell you a secret--
something they don't teach you
in your temple.
The gods envy us.
They envy us
because we're mortal.
Because any moment
might be our last.
Everything's more beautiful
because we're doomed.
You will never be lovelier
than you are now.
We will never be here again.
I thought you were a dumb brute.
I could have forgiven
a dumb brute.
Do it.
Nothing is easier.
Aren't you afraid?
Everyone dies.
Today or 50 years from now,
what does it matter?
Do it.
You'll kill more men
if I don't kill you.
Many.
( knife clatters to ground )
♪ ♪
( waves crashing )
My lord, there's...
Tell the men to start
loading the ship.
We're going home.
Gather
the stores.
Prepare
the ship.
Agamemnon
is a proud man,
but he knows when
he's made a mistake.
The man sends you
to make his apologies?
What are you doing enthralled
to that pig of a king?
The world seems simple
to you, my friend,
but when you're a king,
very few choices
are simple.
Ithaca cannot afford
an enemy like Agamemnon.
Are we supposed
to fear him?
You don't fear anyone,
that's your problem.
Fear is useful.
We need you back.
Greece
needs you.
Greece got along fine
before I was born,
and Greece will be Greece
long after I'm dead.
I'm not talking
about the land.
The men need you.
Stay, Achilles.
You were born for this war.
Things are less simple today.
Women have a way
of complicating things.
( chuckles )
Of all the kings of Greece,
I respect you the most,
but in this war,
you're a servant.
Sometimes you have to serve
in order to lead.
I hope you understand
that one day.
We're going home?
We sail in the morning.
Greeks are being slaughtered.
We can't just sail away.
If it's fighting
you still long for,
there'll always be
another war.
That I promise you.
These are our countrymen.
You betray all of
Greece just to see
Agamemnon fall.
Someone has to lose.
The gods favor our cause.
Now is the time
to destroy
the Greek army.
( shouts of agreement )
Their morale is battered.
Hit them now, hit them hard,
and they will run.
( crowd agreeing )
( talking stops )
The Myrmidons
didn't fight yesterday.
There must be dissension
among the Greeks,
but if we attack their ships,
we will unify them.
If they decide
to attack us, let them.
Our walls can't be breached.
We'll beat them back again.
( men murmuring )
Yesterday, the Greeks
underestimated us.
We should
not return the favor.
You're confident about
the meaning of these omens?
The desecration of his
temple angers Apollo.
The gods have
cursed the Greeks.
Prepare the army.
We attack at daybreak.
( quiet discussion )
Am I still your captive?
You're my guest.
In Troy, guests can leave
whenever they want.
You should
leave, then.
Would you leave
this all behind?
Would you
leave Troy?
( sighs )
( low talking )
( panting )
( arrows whooshing )
( shouting )
( horn blowing )
( arrows whooshing )
( shouting )
( rumbling )
( screaming )
( shouting )
( creaking, crackling )
( banging )
( banging, shouting )
AGAMEMNON:
Hold those barricades!
( banging )
( shouting )
Archers to the rear.
( distant shouting )
( shouting )
Achilles...
( cheering )
Achilles.
( shouting )
Now!
Forward!
( shouting )
( rumbling )
( metal clanging )
( grunting )
( shouting )
( metal clanging )
( cheering )
( groaning )
( choking gasp )
( cheering )
( panting )
( groaning )
( crowd gasps )
( panting )
( choking gasps )
( groaning )
( grunts )
( panting )
Enough
for one day.
( softly ):
Yes.
Back to the ships!
Back
to the ships!
It was his cousin.
GLAUCUS:
To Troy!
Back to
the city!
Back to the city!
To Troy!
Back
to the city!
We were going
to sail home today.
I don't think anyone's
sailing home now.
( waves crashing )
( gulls calling )
Achilles.
( clanking )
You violated my command.
No, my lord,
there was a mistake.
I ordered the Myrmidons
to stand down.
You led them into combat.
I didn't lead them, my lord.
We thought you did.
Where's Patroclus?
Patroclus!
We thought
he was you, my lord.
He wore your armor,
your shield,
your greaves,
your helmet.
He even moved like you.
Where is he?!
( grunting )
Where?
He's dead, my lord.
Hector cut his throat.
( grunting, choking )
BRISEIS:
Don't!
( choking )
( grunting )
( coughs )
( clanks )
♪ ♪
Where are
you taking me?
Do you remember
how to get here?
Yes.
The next time you come
here, follow the tunnel.
There are no turns,
so you can't get lost.
Just keep walking.
When you get to the end,
you'll be by the river.
You follow the river
until you get to Mount Ida.
Why are you telling me this?
If I die...
No.
...I don't know how long
the city will stand.
If the Greeks get inside
the walls, it's over.
They'll kill all the men,
they'll throw the babies
from the city walls...
Please...
...and the women
they'll take as slaves.
And that for you will
be worse than dying.
Why are you saying
such things?
Because I want you
to be ready.
I want you
to get our boy
and I want you
to bring him here.
You save as many people
as you can,
but you get here, and you run.
I killed a boy today...
and he was young.
He was much too young.
♪ ♪
That boy's just saved
this war for us.
♪ ♪
( crackling )
( whooshing, thumping )
( gasps )
( gulls cawing )
( waves crashing )
( chain jingling )
Eudorus.
My lord.
I need my armor.
♪ ♪
( horse snorts )
No.
Don't go!
Rope!
Hector's my cousin.
He's a good man.
Don't
fight him.
Please don't
Please!
Hah!
( chariot clattering )
( horses huffing )
No.
( horse blowing )
( echoing ):
Hector!
( panting )
( echoing ):
Hector!
( crows cawing in distance )
( sighs )
Hector!
Father...
forgive me
for any offenses.
I've served you
as best as I could.
ACHILLES:
Hector!
May the gods be with you.
Hector?
No father ever had a better son.
ACHILLES:
Hector!
Apollo guard you, my prince.
You're the best man I know.
You're a prince of Troy.
I know you'll make me proud.
ACHILLES:
Hector!
Remember what I told you.
You don't have to go.
You don't.
You remember what I told you.
♪ ♪
ACHILLES ( echoing ):
Hector!
( baby crying )
ACHILLES:
Hector!
♪ ♪
( gates clanking open )
( gates rumble and clank )
( clanking stops )
( clanking resumes )
( gates thud closed )
I've seen this moment
in my dreams.
I'll make a pact with you.
With the gods
as our witnesses,
let us pledge that the winner
will allow the loser
all the proper funeral rituals.
There are no pacts
between lions and men.
Now you know
who you're fighting.
( helmet clatters )
I thought it was you
I was fighting yesterday--
and I wish it had been you--
but I gave the dead boy
the honor he deserved.
You gave him
the honor of your sword.
You won't have eyes tonight.
You won't have ears or a tongue.
You will wander the underworld
blind, deaf and dumb,
and all the dead will know
this is Hector,
the fool who thought
he killed Achilles.
♪ ♪
( grunts )
( growling )
♪ ♪
( blades clanging )
( yelling )
( grunts )
♪ ♪
( roaring )
( yells and grunts )
( gasping )
Get up, prince of Troy.
Get up.
I won't let a stone
take my glory.
( panting )
( yells )
( grunting )
♪ ♪
( groans )
( raspy, loud gasps )
( moaning quietly )
♪ ♪
( waves crashing )
( panting )
( sobbing )
( sobbing and whimpering )
( panting )
( breathing heavily )
( waves crashing )
You lost your cousin.
( blade rings under stone )
Now you've taken mine.
When does it end?
It never ends.
( waves rushing )
( waves receding )
( rustling )
( robe rustling )
Who are you?
I have endured
what no one on earth
has endured before.
I kissed the hands of the man
who killed my son.
Priam?
How did you get in here?
I know my own country better
than the Greeks, I think.
You're a brave man.
I could have your head on a spit
in the blink of an eye.
Do you really think death
frightens me now?
I watched my eldest son die,
watched you drag his body
behind your chariot.
Give him back to me.
He deserves the honor
of a proper burial.
You know that.
Give him to me.
He killed my cousin.
He thought it was you.
How many cousins
have you killed?
How many sons and fathers
and brothers and husbands?
How many,
brave Achilles?
I knew your father.
He died before his time.
But he was lucky
not to live long enough
to see his son fall.
You have taken
everything from me.
My eldest son,
heir to my throne,
defender of my kingdom.
I cannot change what happened.
It is the will of the gods.
But give me
this small mercy.
I loved my boy from the moment
he opened his eyes
till the moment you closed them.
Let me wash his body.
Let me say the prayers.
Let me place two coins
on his eyes for the boatman.
If I let you walk out of here...
( clears throat )
If I let you take him...
...it doesn't change anything.
You are still my enemy
in the morning.
You're still my enemy tonight.
But even enemies
can show respect.
I admire your courage.
Meet me outside in a moment.
( sobbing quietly )
( sniffling )
We'll meet again soon,
my brother.
Your son was the best
I've fought.
( sighs )
In my country, the funeral games
last for 12 days.
It is the same in my country.
Then the prince
will have that honor.
No Greek will attack Troy
for 12 days.
Briseis?
Oh!
We thought you
were dead.
We thought...
You're free.
If I hurt you...
it's not what I wanted.
Go.
No one will stop you.
You have my word.
Come, my girl.
You're a far
better king
than the one leading this army.
( chariot leaving )
Achilles makes a secret pact
and I have to honor it?
What treason is this?
Consorting with the enemy king.
Giving him 12 days of peace.
Peace! Peace!
Their prince is dead,
their army is leaderless.
This is the time to attack!
Even with Hector gone, we have
no way to breach their walls.
I will smash their walls
to the ground
if it costs me 40,000 Greeks.
Hear me, Zeus!
I will smash their walls
to the ground!
( sighs )
It's good.
For my son back home.
AGAMEMNON:
Well, Odysseus.
You found a way
to make the sheep
invite the wolves to dinner.
Forgive me, Eudorus.
I should never have struck you.
You've been a loyal friend
all your life.
I hope I never
disappoint you again.
It's I who have been
the disappointment.
Rouse the men,
you're taking them home.
Aren't you coming with us?
I have my own battle
to fight.
Then we march beside you.
No.
I don't want our men
to be a part of this.
It's a beautiful night.
Go, Eudorus.
This is the last order
I give you.
Fighting for you has been
my life's honor, my lord.
♪ ♪
Open the gates! Open the gates!
( horses neighing )
GLAUCUS:
Here.
PRIAM:
Plague.
GLAUCUS:
Don't get too close, my king.
This is the will
of the gods.
They desecrated
the temple of Apollo,
and Apollo desecrated
their flesh.
They thought they
could come here
and sack our city
in a day.
Now look at them,
fleeing across the Aegean.
PRIAM:
What is this?
ARCHEPTOLEMUS:
An offering to Poseidon.
The Greeks are praying
for a safe return home.
This is a gift.
We should take it
to the temple of Poseidon.
I think we should burn it.
VELIOR:
Burn it?
My prince,
it's a gift to the gods.
Father, burn it.
( shouts and cheers )
( loud rumbling )
( grunting )
( shouting and cheering )
( cheering )
PARIS:
Look at them.
You'd think their
prince had never died.
You're their prince now.
Make your brother proud.
( neighing )
( grunts )
♪ ♪
( groaning )
( muffled yelling )
( muffled screaming )
♪ ♪
( shouting )
( shouts and screams )
Briseis. Where is she?
Where?
I don't know.
Please, I have a son.
Then get him out of Troy.
( neighing )
Briseis!
( screaming )
( indistinct shouting )
( distant screaming )
Paris! Andromache!
Helen, we must go.
Where?
I'll show you.
Now! Hurry!
Paris, Paris...
ANDROMACHE:
It's a long way.
Quick. We must go now.
Briseis!
BRISEIS:
Paris!
( gasps )
Let it burn! Let Troy burn!
Burn it! Burn it all!
Burn Troy!
It's a long way. Quick.
( indistinct shouting )
Come.
I stay.
No.
My father will never
abandon the city.
I can't leave him.
The city is dead.
They're burning it
to the ground.
( indistinct mumbling )
What's your name?
Aeneas.
Do you know how
to use a sword?
Yes.
The sword of Troy.
As long as it remains
in the hands of a Trojan,
our people have a future.
Protect them, Aeneas.
Find them a new home.
I will.
ANDROMACHE:
Hurry! Quick!
Paris, Paris, Briseis
wasn't in her room.
I'll find her.
Go.
I'll stay with you.
Please don't leave me.
How could you love
me if I ran now?
Please.
We will be together again,
in this world or the next.
We will be together.
Go.
To the gates!
( grunting )
( yelling )
( shouting )
( grunting )
Soldiers of Troy,
you men are warriors!
To lead you has been my honor!
( cheering )
My prince!
( banging )
The boatman waits for us.
I say we make him
wait a little longer!
( shouting )
( screams )
( grunting )
( metal clanging )
BRISEIS:
Paris!
( grunting )
( shouting )
Have you no honor?!
Have
you no honor?!
( grunts )
( groans )
( women screaming )
Too late for prayer, priestess.
( grunting, groaning )
I almost lost this war because
of your little romance.
( screaming )
You'll be my slave
in Mycenae.
A Trojan priestess
scrubbing my floors.
And at night...
( gasping )
( screaming )
( choking gasps )
( grunts )
Get up!
Hold her.
( grunting )
Come with me.
No!
( gasping )
Paris!
No!
( grunts )
( groans )
Don't!
Please!
Paris! Don't!
( groans )
( grunts )
It's all right.
It's all
right.
( sniffling )
You gave me peace...
in a lifetime of war.
Briseis, come.
ACHILLES:
Go.
You must.
Troy has fallen. Go.
We must go.
I know a way out.
( approaching shouts )
It's all right. Go.
Briseis, come.
Go.
♪ ♪
Find peace... my brother.
ODYSSEUS:
If they ever tell my story,
let them say
I walked with giants.
Men rise and fall
like the winter wheat,
but these names
will never die.
Let them say I lived
in the time of Hector,
tamer of horses.
Let them say I lived
in the time of Achilles.
♪ ♪
♪ Remember ♪
♪ I will still be here ♪
♪ As long as you hold me ♪
♪ In your memory ♪
♪ Remember ♪
♪ When your dreams
have ended ♪
♪ Time can be transcended ♪
♪ Just remember me ♪
♪ I am the one star that
keeps burning, so brightly ♪
♪ It is the last light
to fade into the rising sun ♪
♪ I'm with you ♪
♪ Whenever you tell my story ♪
♪ For I... ♪
♪ Am all I've done ♪
♪ Remember ♪
♪ I will still be here ♪
♪ As long as you hold me ♪
♪ In your memory ♪
♪ Remember me ♪
♪ I am that one voice ♪
♪ The cold wind
that whispers ♪
♪ And if you listen, you'll
hear me call across the sky ♪
♪ As long as I still can
reach out and touch you ♪
♪ Then I... ♪
♪ Will never die ♪
♪ ♪
♪ Remember ♪
♪ I'll never leave you ♪
♪ If you will only ♪
♪ Remember me ♪
♪ Remember me... ♪
♪ Remember ♪
♪ I will still be here ♪
♪ As long as you hold me
in your memory ♪
♪ Remember ♪
♪ When your dreams
have ended ♪
♪ Time can be transcended ♪
♪ I live forever ♪
♪ Remember me ♪
♪ Remember me... ♪
♪ Remember... ♪
♪ Me. ♪